---
title: "Day 23: Interrupts"
---

An interrupt is a break in the normal flow in a program that can be
returned to. Speaking generally, all calls (but not jumps) are
interrupts. When an interrupt is initiated, control immediately passes
to an Interrupt Service Routine which does what it needs to, then
returns to the point of interruption.

Software Interrupts
-------------------

A software interrupt is intentionally generated by the programmer. A
CALL instruction is technically a software interrupt, but we will
reserve the term for restarts. A restart is identical to CALL but it
takes only one byte. The are used for different things on different
platforms, but on all the TI calculators they execute common OS
routines.

{{% infobox "RST xx"
    "Software restart to address `$00xx`. See below for valid values for `xx`." %}}
00h
: Simulates taking all the batteries out of the calculator.

08h
: Execute system routine `OP1ToOP2`.

10h
: Execute system routine `FindSym`.

18h
: Execute system routine `PushRealO1`.

20h
: Execute system routine `Mov9ToOP1`.

28h
: Part of the `b_call()` macro.

30h
: Execute system routine `FPAdd`.

38h
: System interrupt routine.
{{% /infobox %}}

The RST commands are two bytes smaller than the corresponding `b_call()`
command, and are also a lot faster, so use them whenever possible. And
yes, the arguments to RST have to be hex numbers in -`h` form.

Hardware Interrupts
-------------------

Hardware interrupts are based on some external event that has nothing to
do with the instructions the CPU is executing.

Software or hardware, all interrupts when triggered are like normal
CALLs, in that the current PC value is pushed onto the stack and there
is a transfer to wherever the ISR is located. The actual address depends
on the current interrupt mode.

{{% infobox "IM x" "Sets interrupt mode `x`. `x` = 0, 1, or 2." /%}}

### Mode 0

In mode 0, only external hardware peripherals can generate interrupts.
The ISR is a single byte sent by the peripheral that the CPU executes as
an opcode. The calculator cannot use mode 0.

### Mode 1

The CPU executes a `RST 38h` instruction when an external interrupt
occurs; normally this is triggered by a [hardware timer](#interrupt-maintenance) that ticks at
about 140 Hz.
The TI-83 Plus uses this interrupt to detect keys, blink
the cursor, check the linkport, etc.

The system interrupt uses SP (naturally) and IY, so if you want to use
these registers for other purposes you need to disable interrupts (or
just not process the system interrupt).

### Mode 2

The most fun. In mode 2, the CPU can theoretically jump to any address
in memory. This is the interrupt mode we are interested in.

Setting Up a Mode 2 ISR
-----------------------

In Mode 2, the CPU gets the interrupt address using the I register.
You'd figure I would be a 16-bit register to hold the address of the
interrupt, but that would be too easy. Instead, I holds bits 15 to 8 of
a pointer to a vector table where the interrupt's real address is
stored. (Note: you can only load into/from I using A). Bits 7 to 1 of
this address is a number taken from the data bus and is functionally
random. Since addresses are 16 bits the pointer *must* be an even
number, and for this reason bit 0 is always zero

This is the official ZiLog description of a Mode 2 interrupt; it seems
TI never intended mode 2 be used on the calculators, so things are a bit
harder for us. The low byte of the interrupt address coming from the
data bus is effectively random, so we need to set aside a 257-byte
region of memory that contains a repeating byte that refers to
where our interrupt code is placed.[^random-data]

[^random-data]: Earlier versions of this guide claimed that the value
                on the data bus was predictable such that only a few
                vectors need be specified, but this is not true across
                different calculator hardware versions. You might find
                that your calculator always chooses one of a few addresses,
                but assuming others will do the same will probably make
                your users sad when your assumption turns out to have
                been false.

Assume we've already placed code to run in interrupts at `$8A8A`:

    ; Vector table is based at $8B00
        LD A, $8B
        LD I, A
    ; Fill the vector table with $8A so interrupts always jump to $8A8A,
    ; no matter the value of the low byte.
        LD HL, $8B00
        LD (HL), $8A
        LD DE, $8B01
        LD BC, 256
        LDIR

Now we should create the ISR. When an ISR begins, it has to save the
values of all the registers it will modify. The reason for this is
simple: if it didn't, then the values of the registers would be changed
140 times a second to something unknown, which would play havoc with the
normal program. This can be done either with the stack or very quickly
with two instructions.

{{% infobox "EX AF, AF'"
    "Exchange register pair `AF` with alternate register pair `AF'`." /%}}

{{% infobox "EXX"
    "Exchange register pairs `BC`, `DE`, and `HL` with alternate register pairs `BC'`, `DE'`, and `HL'`." /%}}

Interrupt Maintenance
---------------------

{{% infobox "DI" "Disable interrupts" /%}}
{{% infobox "EI" "Enable interrupts" /%}}
{{% infobox "HALT" "Stop execution and enter low-power mode. On next interrupt, 'wake up' and resume execution." /%}}

You should have interrupts disabled while you are loading the interrupt
data. Some cretin might have left the CPU in Mode 2 when you exited his
game. If an interrupt triggers while you are overwriting pre-existing
interrupt code, you're definitely gonna be feeling below average.

Interrupts should be short and execute quickly (rendering a raytraced 3D
scene in an interrupt is definitely not on :-). If an interrupt takes
too long to complete it may very well be re-initiated and loop forever.
To make sure this doesn't happen, you must know the interrupt enable
port (\#3).

| Bit | If Set                                    | If Reset                                 |
|-----|-------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| 0   | <kbd>ON</kbd> key interrupts are serviced | <kbd>ON</kbd> key interrupts are ignored |
| 1   | Timer interrupts are serviced             | Timer interrupts are ignored             |
| 4   | Linkport interrupts are serviced          | Linkport interrupts are ignored          |

Bits 2 and 3 are usually unimportant, so we're ignoring them here. Just know they should
usually be set to 0 and 1, respectively.

When the interrupt is entered, output %00000000 to disable all interrupts
and prevent an infinite loop. To return, output %00001011, restore the registers,
re-enable interrupts, and then finally return.

Detecting Interrupts
--------------------

You might want to know if interrupts are currently active or not. I
can't think of a use for this, but...\
 On the Z80 CPU, there are two devices (flip-flops) that are called
`IFF1` and `IFF2`. When the interrupt timer goes off, `IFF1` is checked
to see if the interrupt can run. `IFF2` is used to save the status of
`IFF1`.

To check the status of the flip-flops, a `LD A, I` or `LD A, R`
instruction will store the status of `IFF2` in the P/V flag. Reset means
interrupts are disabled, set means interrupts are active.

### Program 23-1

Here's a sample program that demonstrates everything so far.

    INTRPT_MASK   .EQU   %00001011

        b_call(_ClrLCDFull)

        DI                     ; Turn interrupts off until we're ready

    ; Set up vector table
        LD A, $8B
        LD I, A
        LD HL, $8B00
        LD (HL), $9A
        LD DE, $8B01
        LD BC, 256
        LDIR
    ; Copy the ISR into position
        LD HL, interrupt
        LD DE, $9A9A
        LD BC, interruptEnd - interrupt
        LDIR

        LD A, INTRPT_MASK      ; Enable hardware
        OUT (3), A

        IM 2                   ; Switch to Mode 2
        EI                     ; Activate interrupts

    ; GetKey and GetCSC only function in Mode 1, 
    ; so gotta use the key port.
        LD     A, %10111111
        OUT    (1), A

    KeyLoop:
        IN     A, (1)
        CP     %01111111       ; If [DEL] pressed, exit
        JR     NZ, KeyLoop

        LD     A, %00001011    ; Enable hardware
        OUT    (3), A
        IM     1               ; Calculator needs Mode 1
        RET

    counter:
        .DW    $0000

    interrupt:
        .org $9A9A             ; This code runs from $9A9A
        EX     AF, AF'
        EXX
        XOR     A              ; Disable hardware
        OUT    (3), A

        LD     HL, 0
        LD     (CurRow), HL
        LD     HL, (counter)
        INC    HL
        LD     (counter), HL
        b_call(_DispHL)

        LD     A, INTRPT_MASK   ; Enable hardware
        OUT    (3), A
        EX     AF, AF'
        EXX
        EI
        RET
    interruptEnd:

The program counts at a frenetic pace until you press <kbd>DEL</kbd>. For more
fun, change the value of INTRPT\_MASK to disable certain hardware
events.

Interrupt Ports
---------------

You already know port 3, here's another

### Port 4 — Interrupt Status Port

Inputs

| Bit | If Set                                         | If Reset                                           |
|-----|------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| 0   | <kbd>ON</kbd> key interrupt has been generated | <kbd>ON</kbd> key interrupt has not been generated |
| 1   | Timer interrupt has been generated             | Timer interrupt has not been generated             |
| 3   | <kbd>ON</kbd> key is being depressed           | <kbd>ON</kbd> key is up                            |

Outputs

| Bit | Effect                                                                        |
|-----|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1-2 | Interrupt speed (0 to 3). %11 is slowest, %00 is fastest. Normal speed is %11 |

The TI-OS has the system flag `OnInterrupt` that is set if a one is read
from bit 0 of port 4. This will result in an `ERR: BREAK` message when
the program returns to the home screen. You can prevent this by

-   Disabling the <kbd>ON</kbd> interrupt.
-   Clearing the <kbd>ON</kbd> status flag.
-   Resetting the system flag.
-   The flag is only set in the system interrupt, so just don't run it.

TSRs
----

TSRs are Terminate and Stay Resident programs. If you change the RET and
exchange instructions in your interrupt to `JP $003A`, then you'll
process the calculator's system interrupt as well as your own.

Whoa, whoa, wait a minute. Why are we jumping to \$003A? Isn't the
system routine at \$0038??

Well, yes, the Mode 1 interrupt does jump to \$0038. What we are doing
is swapping the shadow registers when our interrupt is run, and we want
them to stay swapped when the system interrupt is running. A section of
the code at \$0038 looks like

```
0038: JR    $006A
003A: IN    A, (4)
.
.
006A: EX    AF, AF'
006B: EXX
006C: JR    $003A
```

Yes this is completely redundant, but by jumping to \$003A the exchanges
get skipped over.

This is useful if you still want `GetKey` and `GetCSC` and other Mode 1
features to work while you're in Mode 2.\
Also, if you don't switch back to Mode 1 when the program ends, your
interrupt will still be active, even during graphing and (provided they
don't use interrupts themselves) other programs! Unfortunately, drawing
and archiving will kill 'em.

Unfortunately, because you have no control over other code once your program
exits, TSRs tend to be unpredictable- it's very easy for something else
to stomp on the memory you were using and cause a crash.

### Program 23-2

You can use this program instead of masking tape and a sharpie. Test it
by pressing <kbd>LOG</kbd>.

Note that this is very similar to the last program, but we deliberately
skip returning to mode 1 before exiting the program.

        DI

    ; We must store the interrupt somewhere in RAM so it sticks around
        LD     HL, interrupt
        LD     DE, $9A9A
        LD     BC, interrupt_end - interrupt
        LDIR

        LD     HL, $9900
        LD     DE, $9901
        LD     BC, 256
        LD     (HL), $9A
        LDIR

        LD     A, $99
        LD     I, A

        IM     2
        EI

        RET

    interrupt:
        EX     AF, AF'
        EXX

        LD     A, $FF
        OUT    (1), A

        LD     A, $DF
        OUT    (1), A

        IN     A, (1)
        CP     $F7
        JP     NZ, $003A

        SET    TextInverse, (IY + TextFlags)

        LD     HL, interrupt_message - interrupt + $9A9A

        LD     DE, $3300
        LD     (PenCol), DE
        b_call(_VPutS)

        LD     D, $39
        LD     (PenCol), DE
        b_call(_VPutS)

        RES    TextInverse, (IY + TextFlags)

        JP     $003A

    interrupt_message:
        .DB    "This TI-83 Plus is property of", 0
        .DB    "PUT YOUR NAME HERE!!... HANDS OFF!", 0

    interrupt_end:
